See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/327547625
 A Research on Machine Learning Methods and Its Applications
 Article  in  Journal of Educational Technology and Online Learning · September 2018
 DOI: 10.31681/jetol.457046
 CITATIONS
 53
 1 author:
 Özer Çelik
 Eskisehir Osmangazi University
 77 PUBLICATIONS   505 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
 All content following this page was uploaded by Özer Çelik on 02 January 2019.
 READS
 25,948
 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
Journal of Educational Technology & 
Online Learning 
Volume 1 │Issue 3│2018 
http://dergipark.gov.tr/jetol 
A Research on Machine Learning Methods and Its Applications 
Özer ÇELİK (Corresponding author) *  
Serthan Salih ALTUNAYDIN * 
* Osmangazi University, Eskisehir, Turkey.  
Article Info  
Abstract 
Received:  01 August 2018 
Revised:    21 August 2018 
Accepted:  30 August 2018 
Review 
DOI: 10.31681\jetol.457046 
Machine learning is a science which was found and developed as a subfield of 
artificial intelligence in the 1950s. The first steps of machine learning goes back to 
the 1950s but there were no significant researches and developments on this science. 
However, in the 1990s, the researches on this field restarted, developed and have 
reached to this day. It is a science that will improve more in the future. The reason 
behind this development is the difficulty of analysing and processing the rapidly 
increasing data. Machine learning is based on the principle of finding the best model 
for the new data among the previous data thanks to this increasing data. Therefore, 
machine learning researches will go on in parallel with the increasing data. This 
research includes the history of machine learning, the methods used in machine 
learning, its application fields, and the researches on this field. The aim of this study 
is to transmit the knowledge on machine learning, which has become very popular 
nowadays, and its applications to the researchers. 
Keywords: Machine Learning, Machine Learning Algorithms, Artificial Intelligence, 
Big Data. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Learning is defined as “the process of a change and enhancement in the behaviours through 
exploring new information in time” by Simon. When the “learning” in this definition is 
performed by the machines, it is called machine learning. The term enhancement is creating 
the best solution based on the existing experiences and samples during machine learning 
process (Sırmaçek, 2007). As a result of the developments in information technologies, the 
term ‘big data’ has emerged. The term ‘big data’ is not a new concept and can be defined as 
enormous and accumulating raw data sets which have no limits and cannot be analysed by the 
traditional database techniques (Altunışık, 2015). Enormous data are collected from the 
Internet applications, ATMs, credit card swiping machines and etc. The information collected 
by this way is waiting to be analysed. The aim of analysing the data collected in different 
fields change in accordance with the business sector. Machine learning applications are used 
in some fields like natural language processing, image processing and computer vision, 
speech and handwriting recognition, automotive, aviation, production, generation of energy, 
calculated finance and biology. However, the aim is based on the principle of analysing and 
interpretation of the previous data. As it is impossible to analyse and interpret by human, 
machine learning methods and algorithms have been developed to do this (Amasyalı, 2008).  
In this study, the concept of machine learning, which has become very popular recently, is  
examined in detail. The study includes information about the history of machine learning, the 
methods and algorithms used and its application areas. The final part is a conclusion which 
consists of the results of the previous studies. 
Suggested citation: Çelik, Ö., Altunaydın, S.S. (2018). A Research on Machine Learning Methods and Its Applications. 
Journal of Educational Technology & Online Learning, 1(3), 25-40.   
JETOL 2018, Volume 1, Issue 3 
Çelik, Ö., Altunaydın, S.S. 
2. MACHINE LEARNING  
2.1. Definition 
There is no error margin in the operations carried out by computers based an algorithm and 
the operation follows certain steps. Different from the commands which are written to have an 
output based on an input, there are some situations when the computers make decisions based 
upon the present sample data. In those situations, computers may make mistakes just like 
people in the decision-making process. That is, machine learning is the process of equipping 
the computers with the ability to learn by using the data and experience like a human brain 
(Gör, 2014).  
The main aim of machine learning is to create models which can train themselves to improve, 
perceive the complex patterns, and find solutions to the new problems by using the previous 
data (Tantuğ ve Türkmenoğlu, 2015).  
2.2. History 
In 1940s, based on the studies on the electrical crashes of the neurons, the scientists explained 
the decision-making mechanism of human by cannon and fire. In this way, the researches of 
the artificial intelligence started in the 1950s (Erdem, 2014). In those years, Alan Turin 
executed the Turing Test in order to test the ability of a machine to imitate a human. The aim 
of the Turing Test was to measure the ability of the machine to make a contact with a human 
during an interview. If the machine performed worse than a human, it was successful. In 
1956, the term ‘artificial intelligence’ was first used in a summer school held by Marvin 
Minsky from Massachusetts Institute of Technology, John McCarthy from Stanford 
University and Allen Newell and Herbert Simon from Carnegie-Mellon University. Until that 
time, Alan Turing’s term, ‘machine intelligence’, had been used. In 1959, Arthur Samul 
created the checkers programme, and then machine learning got its way. From those 
developments to the 1980s, there were some studies on abstract mind, information-based 
systems, which was called the ‘winter of artificial intelligence’. In the 1990s, artificial 
intelligence and machine learning studies accelerated due to the developments in game 
technologies. Nowadays, artificial intelligence and machine learning are used in lots of 
researches and work sectors (Topal, 2017) 
2.3. Machine Learning Methods  
Machine Learning can be examined in four parts as follows; 
 Supervised learning  
 Unsupervised learning  
 Semi-supervised learning  
 Reinforced learning  
Supervised Learning: It is a method in which the present input data is used to reach the 
result set. There are two types of supervised learning: classification and regression supervised 
learning.  
 Classification: Distributing the data into the categories defined on the data set 
according to their specific features.  
 Regression: Predicting or concluding the other features of the data based on its some 
available features.  
Unsupervised Learning: The difference between the supervised and unsupervised learning is 
that in unsupervised learning the output data is not given. The learning process occurs by 
using the relations and connections between the data. Also, unsupervised learning doesn’t 
have a training data. 
There are also two types of unsupervised learning: clustering and association. 
26 
JETOL 2018, Volume 1, Issue 3 
Çelik, Ö., Altunaydın, S.S. 
 Clustering: Finding the groupings of data which are similar to each other when 
inherent groupings in the data is not known.  
 Association: Determining the relations and connections among the data in the same 
data set.  
Deduction of Features: In some cases, although lots of features about the data are known, the 
features related to group and category of the data cannot be determined. In such cases, 
selecting a subgroup of features or getting new features combining the features is called 
deduction of features (Erdem, 2014). 
Semi-supervised Learning: supervised and unsupervised learning is inadequate when the 
labelled data are less than unlabelled data. In such cases, the unlabelled data, which are very 
inadequate, is used to deduce information about them. And, this method is called semi
supervised learning. The difference between the semi-supervised learning and the supervised 
learning is the labelled data set. In supervised learning, the labelled data are more than the 
data to be predicted. In contrast, in semi-supervised learning, the labelled data are less than 
the data to be predicted (Kızılkaya ve Oğuzlar, 2018). 
Reinforcement Learning: This is a kind of learning in which the agents learn via reward 
system. Although there is a start and finish points, the aim of the agent is to use the shortest 
and the correct ways to reach the goal. When the agent goes through the correct ways, s/he is 
given positive rewards. But the going through wrong ways means negative rewards. Learning 
occurs on the way to the goal (Sırmaçek, 2007). 
2.4. Machine Learning Algorithms  
2.4.1. Artificial Neural Networks 
Artificial neural network is a data processing system which is developed based on the 
biological neural networks in the human brain to function like human brain neural networks 
(Kocadayı, Erkaymaz, ve Uzun, 2017). 
Neurons (process elements) are the basics of artificial neural networks. Neurons have 5 basic 
functions: inputs, weights, summation function, activation function and output. 
Figure 2.1. The structure of artificial neuron 
Inputs (x1, x2, …, xn): It is the layer created by the user with the samples in the data set.  
Weight (w1, w2, ..., wn): It shows how much of the input data would reach the output. For 
example; w1 weight shows how much the x1 input would affect the output. The values of the 
weights can be changeable, which doesn’t mean that the inputs are important or unimportant.  
Summation Function: This is the function which is used to calculate the total input in a cell. 
Various functions are used during calculation. These functions are explained in the following 
table: 
27 
JETOL 2018, Volume 1, Issue 3 
Çelik, Ö., Altunaydın, S.S. 
Table 2.1. The summation functions used in artificial neural networks 
Name of the 
function 
Function 
Explanation 
Weighted total              
Multiplication              
Maximum                  
Minimum                   
Incremental total                     
Inputs and weight values are multiplied. 
The calculated values are added to each 
other. 
Inputs and weight values are multiplied. 
The calculated values are multiplied. 
Inputs and weight values are multiplied. 
The highest calculated value is taken. 
Inputs and weight values are multiplied. 
The lowest calculated value is taken. 
Weighted total is calculated. 
The previous weighted total is calculated.  
Activation Function: This function is used to calculate the output value which corresponds 
the input value. In some neural network models, it is must for the activation function to be 
derivable. Calculating the derivative is important for the learning process of the network. 
Thus, the derivation of the sigmoid function is the most commonly used function because it 
can be written in the function itself. It is not compulsory to use the same activation function in 
all the cells. They can have different activation functions. Activation functions are as follows: 
linear function, sigmoid function, hyperbolic tangent function, sine function, digit function.   
Output: This is the value which is determined by the activation value. The last output 
produced can both be sent to the other cells or to the outer world. If there is a feedback, the 
cell may use the output as an input by this feedback (Haciefendioğlu, 2012). 
2.4.1.1. Single Layer and Multilayer Artificial Neural Networks  
The first researches on artificial intelligence started with the single layer artificial neural 
networks. The most important feature of the network is classification of the problems which 
can be selected linear as a layer. After the inputs in the problem are multiplied by the weights 
and added, the calculated values are classified according to their threshold value as high or 
low.  The groups are shown like -1 and 1 or 0 and 1. During the learning process, both the 
weights and the weights of threshold value are updated. The output value of the threshold 
value is 1. Since the single layer artificial neural networks are inefficient for the nonlinear 
problems, multilayer artificial neural networks have been developed. Today, mostly used 
artificial neural network is the multilayer artificial neural network. Multilayer networks 
emerged during the studies to solve the XOR problems. Multilayer networks have 3 layers. 
Input Layer: This layer gets the information from the outer world, but there is no process on 
this layer.  
Interlayers: The information from the input layer is processed on this layer. Mostly one 
interlayer can be adequate for the solution of the problem. However, if the relations between 
input and output are not linear or there are some complications, more than one layer can be 
used.  
Output Layer: The information from the interlayer is processed on this layer and the outputs 
which correspond the input are detected.  
In training the multilayer artificial neural networks, the ‘delta rule’ is used. As the multilayer 
networks use supervised learning methods, both the inputs and the outputs which correspond 
the inputs are shown to the network. According to the learning rule, the error margin between 
the outputs and the expected outputs are distributed to the network in order to minimize the 
error margin (Öztemel, (2003). 
28 
JETOL 2018, Volume 1, Issue 3 
Çelik, Ö., Altunaydın, S.S. 
2.4.1.2. Feedforward and back propagation artificial neural networks 
Artificial neural network architectures are divided into two groups as feedforward and back 
propagation based on the directions of the links between the neurons. In the feedforward 
networks, the signals go from input layer to output layer on the one-way links. At the same 
time, in the feedforward networks, the output values of the cells in one layer are transmitted to 
the following layers as the inputs on the weights. The input layer sends the input to the hidden 
layer without making any change. Once this information is processed on the hidden and the 
output layer, its output on the network is determined. Multilayer sensors and learning vector 
quantity can be examples of feedforward artificial networks.  
The most important characteristics of the back propagation artificial neural networks is that 
output value of at least one cell is given to itself or another cell as an input value. The back 
propagation can be processed on a retardation unit as well as the cells in one layer or among 
the cells on other layers. Because of this feature, the back propagation artificial neural 
networks show a dynamic behaviour [12]. Those networks got their name by their function 
that they can organize the  
weights backwards in order to minimize the errors occurred on 
the output layer (Hamzaçebi ve Kutay, 2004). 
2.4.2. Decision Trees 
A decision tree which learns  from the data classified by the induction is a decision making 
structure. It is a kind of learning algorithm which divides the large amount of data into small 
portions by using simple decision making steps. At the end of every successful division, the 
similarity of the elements in the final group increases. The decision trees, which have 
descriptive and predictive features, are one of the most popular classification algorithms 
because they can be easily interpreted, integrated to the databases and are reliable (Albayrak 
ve Yılmaz Koltan, 2009). Decision tree have three structures: decision nodes, branches and 
leaves.  
Root Nodes: It is a node which has no former branch and can create one or more branch. 
Root nodes show the dependent variable and show which variable will be used for the 
classification.  
Interior Node: It is a node which has one incoming branch and can have two or more 
outgoing branches.  
Leaf or Terminal nodes: These are the nodes which has an incoming branch but no outgoing 
brand. 
This is a structure which shows the result of the test between the leaves and the nodes, and 
has a role to determine the groups to be defined. If the classification is not completed at the 
end of the branch, a decision node emerges. The place of the nodes at the end of every branch 
is called deepness. The user can determine the number of deepness by analysing the 
appropriateness of the decision tree to the data set. In the decision trees, the deepth and the 
number of groups are directly proportional. 
Figure 2.2. A sample of decision tree. 
29 
JETOL 2018, Volume 1, Issue 3 
Çelik, Ö., Altunaydın, S.S. 
The decision tree is shaped by the questions and their answers. As a result, some rules emerge 
according to the answers. Once the variable, which is the source of the question, is 
determined, this variable creates the root node of the tree. The test to be applied is determined 
by the root node. At the end of the test, the tree is divided into branches and the separation 
process follow the test. Each of the branches on the are candidates for classification process. 
If there is a classification at the end of a branch, a leaf emerges at the end of the branch. The 
leaf is the one of the desired groups in the data. If there is no classification process at the end 
of the branch, there emerges a decision node on this branch. The decision tree aims to reach 
the leaf by the shortest way starting from the root node through sequencing nodes.  
Each feature is used as a test in order to decide on the classification of the training data. After 
the best feature is chosen, it is used on the root node for the test. The number of branches 
changes according to the value of the feature. Which feature is going to be chosen on each 
node is the main selection of the decision tree. The measure of the feature is determined by a 
value called information gain which is also defined as entropy. 
Entropy: Measuring the disorder in a system or events is called entropy. Entropy is related to 
the information and when uncertainty and disorder rise, more information is needed to define 
the data better. The value of the entropy changes between 0 and 1, and the value near 1 means 
more uncertainty. Therefore, it is necessary to lower the entropy value to 0 in decision trees. 
When D represents the distribution of probability P (p1,p2,….pn), the entropy equation is as 
follows: 
Pi is the probability of i class in D dataset which is calculated by dividing the sample size of 
the class i by the sample size of the whole data.  
If the D dataset would be divided into n subclass in the X variable, the information gain is 
calculated by the following equation:  
As it is seen in the equation, E(D) represents the entropy before the dataset is divided; i 
represents the entropy of the subdivision after it is divided E(Di); p(Di) is the probability of 
the i subdivision after it is divided.  
Pruning: overfitting may occur when creating a model on the decision tree. While the model 
becomes successful for the sample data, it can make mistakes with the new data. It occurs 
when there is too much information to be classified or noisy data in the dataset. Pruning is the 
process of cutting the branches which are formed by the noisy data and which leads to 
mistakes. The pruning process has two types: pre-pruning and post-pruning. Generally, post
pruning is preferred. In this process, determined branches are cut or two different branches are 
combined and cut after the whole tree has been created till the leaves by using the whole data. 
At the end of the pruning process the tree gets smaller with less error margins 
(Haciefendioğlu, 2012).   
Widely used various decision tree methods are given in the following table: 
30 
JETOL 2018, Volume 1, Issue 3 
Çelik, Ö., Altunaydın, S.S. 
Table 2.2. Some decision making algorithms (Emel ve Taşkın, 2005). 
DECISION TREE 
ALGORITHM 
FEATURES 
C&RT 
C 4.5 and C5.0 (The 
updated versions of 
ID3 Decision Tree 
Algorithms) 
CHAID (Chi-squared 
Automatic 
Interaction Detector) 
SLIQ 
(Supervised 
Learning in Quest) 
SPRINT (Scalable 
Parallelizable 
Induction of  
Decision Trees) 
There are two dividing process based on Gini. In each nood, which are not 
the final or end, there are two branches. Prunning process is based on the 
complexity of the tree. It is in the form of supporting the classification and 
regression. It works with the continuous goal variables. It needs the data to 
be prepared.  
The tree is formed by the multiple branches emerged from each node. The 
number of the branches is the same as the number of categories of the 
predictor. It combines more than one decision tree in one classifier. It uses 
the information gain for the separation. Prunnig process is based on the 
error margin in each leaf.  
It performs the separation by chi-quare tests. The number of the branches 
changes between 2 and the number of the categories that the predictor has.  
It is a fast scalable classifier. It has a fast pruning algorithm.  
It is ideal for big data sets. The separation process is based on the value of 
only one feature. It functions on the whole memory limits by using the 
feature list data structure.  
2.4.3. Support Vector Machines  
Support vector machines (SVM) are one of the supervised classification techniques which 
were founded by Cortes and Rapnik in 1995. SVM is a kind of machine algorithm which 
makes predictions and generalizations on the new data by learning on the data sets whose 
distribution is unclear. The main principle of SVM is based on finding the hyperplane which 
separates the data of two classes the most appropriately. Support vector machines are divided 
into two categories based on the classification that the data set is separated linearly and not 
linearly (Güneren, 2015). 
Linearly separable case: With SVM it is aimed to separate the samples of two classes which 
are generally shown with the labels (-1, +1) with two different most appropriate hyperplane 
by the help of decision function generated at the end of the training data. This process is 
reached by finding the hyperplane which makes the length between the nearest spots to the 
SVM maximum. The hyperplane, which makes the border maximum, optimum hyperplane 
and the spots limiting the border are called support vectors. 
Figure 2.3. Hyperplanes for problem with two class. 
31 
JETOL 2018, Volume 1, Issue 3 
Çelik, Ö., Altunaydın, S.S. 
Figure 2.4. Optimum hyperplane and support vectors 
Figure 2.5. Finding the hyperplane for linearly separable data  
The decision function for the linearly separable problems can be written like this: 
Linearly inseparable case: In some cases, it can be impossible to separate the data linearly. 
In cases like this, the solution is to define a positive artificial variable (ξi). With a regulation 
parameter shown as C, after making the border maximized, the balance between minimizing 
the classification errors is provided. The optimization problem for the linearly inseparable 
data using (ξi) and C is;  
And the limitations are like this: 
yi (w . ϕ (xi) + b) -1 ≥ 1-ξi  
ξi ≥ 0 ve i=1,…,N 
In order to solve the optimization problem, the linearly inseparable data is displayed in a high 
dimensional space. This space is called feature space. By this way, the hyperplanes can be 
determined in order to separate the data linearly. SVM can be separated highly linearly by the 
help of kernel functions. The decision function for the linearly inseparable data is written by 
using the Kernel function (K(xi, xj)= ϕ(x). ϕ (xj)) like this:  
32 
JETOL 2018, Volume 1, Issue 3 
Çelik, Ö., Altunaydın, S.S. 
Figure 2.6. Linearly inseparable data set  
Figure 2.7. Finding the hyperplane for the linearly inseparable data set 
Figure 2.8. Transforming the data into a higher dimension by using Kernel function (Kavzoğlu ve Çölkesen, 2010). 
2.4.4. Naive Bayes 
Naïve Bayes classification is a kind of classification which is used to label the data by using 
statistical methods. It is preferred in classification problems as it is easy to apply. In general, 
in Bayes classification, it is aimed to calculate the probability values of the effects of each 
criterion to the result. The Naive Bayes calculates the conditional probability of the class to 
which the data belongs in order to estimate the probability of the class in which the data 
belongs. To perform those operations, Bayes theorem is used. Bayes theorem is this: 
P(A/B) = (P(B/A) * P(A)) / P(B) 
In the theorem; 
P(A): The independent probability of event A,  
P(B): The independent probability of event B, 
P(B|A): the probability of event B when event A occurs,  
P(A|B): the probability of event A when event B occurs, 
The class of the new incoming data can be estimated here by making P (A | B) maximum 
(Çalış, Gazdağı ve Yıldız, 2013). 
33 
JETOL 2018, Volume 1, Issue 3 
Çelik, Ö., Altunaydın, S.S. 
Bayes Classification: Here C represents a class and x=x1,x2,x3,….xm are the values of the 
observed features. The probability of predicting the class according to Bayes theorem x test 
data is calculated as: 
P (C =  j |X=x) =                          
         
 
In the example P (X = x) is ignored in cases where the expression does not change between 
classes. The equation is now like this; 
p (C = cj |X = x) = p(C = cj) p(X = x|C = cj)   
(C =  j) ve p = (X = x | C = cj)  
is predicted from the learning data.  
x1, x2, x3,…, xm  features are conditionally independent of each other. Therefore, the final 
equation is like this (Sağbaş. ve Ballı, 2016).  
2.4.5. Logistic Regression  
Logistic regression is a kind of classification method which models the relationship among 
more than one independent variable and dependent variable. It is an advanced regression 
method which has gained popularity in social sciences today; however, it was used more in 
medical sciences in the past.  
Logistic regression is a technique that is used as an alternative method to the EKK because 
the EKK is insufficient in a multivariate model in which dependent and independent variables 
are discriminated. In the logistic regression analysis, the probability of a dependent variable 
which has two final values. In addition, the variables in the model are continuous. Because of 
its this feature, it is frequently used to classify the observations into the classes. The logistic 
regression model is as follows: 
Pi, shows the probability and 1- Pi, shows the improbability, it is calculated as follows:   
In the equation, the Z is written like this:  Z = β0 + β1X1 + β2X2 + β3X3 +… + βnXn.  
Regression coefficients are shown by β. P values can be reached by taking antilog of Z value. 
Logistic regression has some differences with other regression methods because of the 
assumptions. Those differences provide some conveniences too. These conveniences are:  
 In regression analysis, independent variables should be continuous and they must have 
multiple normal distributions; however, these conditions are not required in the logistic 
regression method. 
 Logistic regression analysis assumes that there are no multiple link problems among 
independent variables. 
 The equality condition of the variance-covariance matrices is not required in the logistic 
regression analysis.  
In logistic regression analysis, after the predictions of the coefficients in the model are made, 
the reliability of the model must be tested. For determining the fitness of the model, Chi
Square test is applied and log similarity function is used in the test. In this method, all logit 
coefficients outside the constant term are tested to be equal to zero or not. The transformed 
form of the L statistic, -2LogL, is used in testing the absence and alternative hypotheses. After 
testing the significance of the model, the significance of the variables in the model must be 
tested. The results are evaluated after the Wald and Score tests are performed. Then, goodness 
34 
JETOL 2018, Volume 1, Issue 3 
Çelik, Ö., Altunaydın, S.S. 
of fit model, which is the process of investigating the effect of describing the response 
variable, is carried out. Finally, after the calculation of the Zi values and the classification of 
the units, the success rate of classifying the Pi values by calculating the antilog of Zi is 
obtained (Ege, ve Bayrakdaroğlu, 2009). 
2.4.6. K-NN  
The k-nearest neighbours algorithm developed by Fix and Hodges in 1951 is based on the 
logic that the variables which are closest to each other belong to the same class. The main 
purpose is to classify the new incoming data in accordance with the previously categorized 
data. Data whose class is not known is called a 'test sample' and previously classified data is 
called 'learning samples'. In the K-NN algorithm, the distance from the test sample to the 
learning samples is calculated and then the closest k learning instances are selected. The 
majority of the selected k samples are used to determine their class; it is also decided that the 
test sample belongs to that class (Özkan, 2013). 
The distance between the data is given by the following equation: 
With the new incoming data, the K value is checked first; so, K value must be selected as an 
odd number in order to avoid equality. In calculations of distance, the methods such as 
Cosinus, Euclidean and Manhattan distances are performed (Kılınç, Borandağ, Yücalar, 
Tunalı, Şimşek ve Özçift , 2016). 
In cases where there is a lot of learning data in the K-NN classification, the success rate is 
also increasing. In addition, very effective results are obtained in noisy data. In addition to 
these successes, however, there are also disadvantages. For example; it is not precisely known 
which distance measure is used when calculating the distance, and it takes too much time to 
calculate the measurement of the test sample’s distance to the learning samples (Özkan, 
2013). 
2.5. Machine Learning Application Areas 
The previous section includes the theoretical background of the machine learning algorithms. 
In this section, information about the areas and studies in which the machine learning are used 
nowadays will be given. Today, the use of machine learning has increased considerably. 
Although it is though that it can only be done in large studies, many people face machine 
learning in their daily life. These studies and applications are as follows: 
Education: One of the most important application fields is education in which there have 
been some studies in order to identify and increase success recently. Despite the projects 
made in the field of education in recent years, the desired success has not been achieved. 
There are a lot of factors that influence this failure. However, it has not been determined 
which factor has more influence on this failure. In this context, by a questionnaire applied to 
secondary school students, the successes of the students in the lessons were predicted by 
machine learning models, which resulted with success (Gök, 2017). 
Similarly, there are some studies in order to determine the proficiencies of students in higher 
education. In 2007, a study was carried out at Pamukkale University, where the students 
identified as risky students according to the failure in mathematics course. In the study, it was 
found out that the scores of 434 students’ university entrance exam; mathematics, sciences, 
Turkish tests and high school graduation scores played a major role in predicting the success 
in mathematics. In the study, 289 students’ data were used for training and 145 students’ data 
35 
JETOL 2018, Volume 1, Issue 3 
Çelik, Ö., Altunaydın, S.S. 
were used for testing. As a result, 86 percent of the students who passed the mathematics 
course were correctly estimated (Güner ve Çomak, 2011).  
Other areas of application for machine learning which have become quite functional in the 
field of education are: 
Image processing: In this method, it is aimed to process and improve recorded images. Some 
application areas where the image processor is used are as follows: 
 Security systems 
 Face detection 
 Medicine (to diagnose diseased tissues and organs) 
 Military (to process underwater and satellite images) 
 Motion detection 
 Object detection 
Computational biology: 
 DNA sequencing 
 Finding a tumor 
 Drug discovery  
Natural language processing: It is aimed to investigate and analyse the structures of natural 
languages. It is possible to perform many applications with natural language processing: 
 Automatic translation of written texts 
 Question-answer machines 
 Automatic summarization of text 
 Understanding speech and command 
Automotive, aviation and production: 
 Detecting malfunctions before they occur 
 Producing autonomous vehicles 
Retail:  
 Customized shelf analysis for persons 
 Recommendation engines 
 Material and stock estimates 
 Purchasing - demand trends 
Finance: 
 Credit controls and risk assessments 
 Algorithmic trading 
Agriculture:   
 Predicting yields or deficiencies by analysing satellite images 
Human Resources: 
 Selecting the most successful candidate among a lot of applicants.  
Energy:  
 Calculating the heating and cooling loads for building designs 
 Power usage analysis 
 Smart network managements  
Meteorology: 
 Weather forecast via sensors 
Health: 
 Providing warning and diagnosis by analysing patient data 
 Disease defining 
 Health care analysis 
Cyber security: 
36 
JETOL 2018, Volume 1, Issue 3 
Çelik, Ö., Altunaydın, S.S. 
 Detecting the harmful network traffic 
 Finding out address fraud 
3. CONCLUSION 
Along with the developments in the technology in recent years, machines have had a big role 
in our lives. There are a lot of data gathered in every part of our lives and these data are 
increasing day by day. Thanks to the machines, these data are used very efficiently. Although 
these machines are thought to be used only in the fields of engineering and computer science, 
they are encountered at every part of human life. Firms that have already recognized and 
invested on this area are using this technology actively today and achieving success. In the 
future, machines that will be successful in the jobs that cannot be done by human will affect 
lots of business sectors and people. Some of the known business areas will become extinct 
and some new business areas will emerge. In such an environment, the power of information 
technology and machines must be strictly taken into consideration. 
37 
JETOL 2018, Volume 1, Issue 3 
Çelik, Ö., Altunaydın, S.S. 
Makine Öğrenmesi Yöntemleri ve Uygulamaları Hakkında Bir İnceleme 
Özet 
Makine öğrenmesi 1950’li yıllarda yapay zekanın alt dalı olarak bulunmuş ve geliştirilmiş bir bilim dalıdır. Makine 
öğrenmesinin ilk adımları 1950’li yıllarda atılmış olup uzun bir süre gözle görülür çalışmalar yapılmamış ve gelişme 
gösterememiştir. Ancak 1990’lı yıllarda tekrar gelişme göstererek çalışmalara başlanmış ve günümüze kadar ulaşmıştır. 
Bundan sonraki zamanlarda daha da gelişecek bir bilim dalı olacaktır. Bunun nedeni de hızla artan veri miktarının (büyük 
veri – big data) analizinin ve işlenmesinin insan eliyle yapılamayacak olmasından kaynaklanmaktadır. Makine öğrenmesi, 
artmakta olan bu veriler sayesinde geçmişteki verilerden yeni veriler için en uygun modeli bulma prensibine 
dayanmaktadır. Bu yüzden gün geçtikçe makine öğrenmesi çalışmaları da artan veriyle doğru orantılı olarak gelişerek 
devam edecektir. Bu çalışmada da makine öğrenmesinin tarihçesi, makine öğrenmesinde kullanılan yöntemler, uygulama 
alanları ve yapılan çalışmalar hakkında bilgiler verilmiştir. Bu çalışmanın amacı günümüzde daha da popüler bir hale 
gelen makine öğrenmesi konusunun ve uygulamalarının araştırmacılara aktarılmasını sağlamaktır. 
Anahtar Kelimeler: Makine öğrenmesi, Makine öğrenmesi algoritmaları, Yapay zeka, Büyük veri 
About the Author(s) 
Özer ÇELİK 
Özer Çelik received his B.C. degree in Computer Engineering, Electric & Electronic Engineering 
Department (Double Major) and M.S degree in Electric & Electronic Engineering Department at 
Eskişehir Osmangazi University. He is in the process of completing his thesis in computer science at 
the Department of Mathematics-Computer. His interest areas are artificial intelligence, machine 
learning, deep learning and mobile applications. 
Mailing Address: Eskişehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Science and Art, Mathematics
Computer Department, 26040, Eskişehir, Turkey. 
Mobile: +90 222 239 37 50 
E-mail: ozer@ogu.edu.tr 
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4409-3101 
Serthan Salih ALTUNAYDIN 
Serthan Salih ALTUNAYDIN has got undergraduated degree from Eskişehir Osmangazi University, 
Department of Mathematics – Computer in 2018. He purposes his taken education, experiences and 
problem solving abilities in computer sciences. He met with artificial intelligence, machine learning, 
artificial neural networks, deep learning in undergraduate and interest and continues researches and 
studies with these subjects. 
Mailing Address: Eskişehir Osmangazi University, 26040, Eskisehir, Turkey. 
Mobile: +90 507 190 49 25 
E-mail: serthan.altunaydin@gmail.com 
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9053-7711 
38 
JETOL 2018, Volume 1, Issue 3 
Çelik, Ö., Altunaydın, S.S. 
REFERENCES 
Albayrak, A. S. ve Yılmaz Koltan, Ş. (2009). Veri Madenciliği: Karar Ağacı Algoritmaları ve 
İMKB Verileri Üzerine Bir Uygulama. Süleyman Demirel Üniversitesi İktisadi ve 
İdari Bilimler Fakültesi Dergisi, 14(1), 31-52. 
Altunışık, R. (2015). Büyük Veri: Fırsatlar Kaynağı mı Yoksa Yeni Sorunlar Yumağı mı?. 
Yildiz Social Science Review, 1(1), 48. 
Amasyalı, M. F. (2008). Yeni Makine Öğrenmesi Metotları ve İlaç Tasarımına Uygulamaları. 
Doktora Tezi, Yıldız Teknik Üniversitesi, İstanbul. 
Ataseven, B. (2013). Yapay Sinir Ağları ile Öngörü Modellemesi. Marmara Üniversitesi Açık 
Arşiv Sistemi, 10(39), 101-115. 
Çalış, K., Gazdağı, O. ve Yıldız, O. (2013). Reklam İçerikli Epostaların Metin Madenciliği 
Yöntemleri ile Otomatik Tespiti. Bilişim Teknolojileri Dergisi, 6(1), 1-7. 
Ege, İ. ve Bayrakdaroğlu, A. (2009). İMKB Şirketlerinin Hisse Senedi Getiri Başarılarının 
Lojistik Regresyon Tekniği ile Analizi. ZKÜ Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi, 5(10), 139-158. 
Emel, G. G. ve Taşkın, Ç. (2005). Veri Madenciliğinde Karar Ağaçları ve Bir Satış Analizi 
Uygulaması. Eskişehir Osmangazi Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi, 6(2), 221-236. 
Erdem, E. S. (2014). Ses Sinyallerinde Duygu Tanıma ve Geri Erişim. Yüksek lisans tezi, 
Başkent Üniversitesi, Ankara. 
Gök, M. (2017). Makine Öğrenmesi Yöntemleri ile Akademik Başarının Tahmin Edilmesi. 
Gazi Üniversitesi Fen Bilimleri Dergisi, 5(3), 139-148. 
Gör, İ. (2014). Vektör Nicemleme İçin Geometrik Bir Öğrenme Algoritmasının Tasarımı ve 
Uygulaması. Yüksek lisans tezi, Adnan Menderes Üniversitesi, Aydın. 
Güner, N. ve Çomak, E. (2011). Mühendislik Öğrencilerinin Matematik 1 Derslerindeki 
Başarısının Destek Vektör Makineleri Kullanılarak Tahmin Edilmesi. Pamukkale 
Üniversitesi Mühendislik Bilimleri Dergisi, 17(2), 87-96. 
Güneren, H. (2015). Destek Vektör Makineleri Kullanarak Gömülü Sistem Üzerinde Yüz 
Tanıma Uygulaması. Yüksek lisans tezi, Yıldız Teknik Üniversitesi, İstanbul. 
Haciefendioğlu, Ş. (2012). Makine Öğrenmesi Yöntemleri ile Glokom Hastalığının Teşhisi. 
Yüksek lisans tezi, Selçuk Üniversitesi, Konya. 
Hamzaçebi, C. ve Kutay, F. (2004). Yapay Sinir Ağları ile Türkiye Elektrik Enerjisi 
Tüketiminin 2010 Yılına Kadar Tahmini. Gazi Üniversitesi Mühendislik Mimarlık 
Fakültesi Dergisi, 19(3), 227-233. 
Kavzoğlu, T. ve Çölkesen, İ. (2010). Destek Vektör Makineleri ile Uydu Görüntülerinin 
Sınıflandırılmasında Kernel Fonksiyonlarının Etkilerinin İncelenmesi. Harita Dergisi, 
sayı. 144, 73-81. 
Kılınç, D., Borandağ, E., Yücalar, F., Tunalı, V., Şimşek, M. ve Özçift, A. (2016). KNN 
Algoritması ve R Dili ile Metin Madenciliği Kullanılarak Bilimsel Makale Tasnifi. 
Marmara Fen Bilimleri Dergisi, 28(3), 89-94. 
Kızılkaya, Y. M. ve Oğuzlar, A. (2018). Denetimli Öğrenme Algoritmalarının R 
Programlama Dili ile Kıyaslanması. Karadeniz, 37(37), 90-98. 
Kocadayı, Y., Erkaymaz, O. ve Uzun, R. (2017). Yapay Sinir Ağları ile Tr81 Bölgesi Yıllık 
Elektrik Enerjisi Tüketiminin Tahmini. Bilge International Journal of Science and 
Technology Research, 1(1), 59-64. 
Özkan, H. (2013). K-Means Kümeleme ve K-NN Sınıflandırma Algoritmalarının Öğrenci 
Notları ve Hastalık Verilerine Uygulanması Bitirme Tezi, İstanbul Teknik 
Üniversitesi, İstanbul. 
Öztemel, E. (2003). Yapay Sinir Ağları. İstanbul: Papatya Yayıncılık. 
39 
JETOL 2018, Volume 1, Issue 3 
Çelik, Ö., Altunaydın, S.S. 
Sağbaş, E. A. ve Ballı, S. (2016). Akıllı Telefon Algılayıcıları ve Makine Öğrenmesi 
Kullanılarak Ulaşım Türü Tespiti. Pamukkale Üniversitesi Mühendislik Bilimleri 
Dergisi, 22(5), 376-383. 
Sırmaçek, B. (2007). Fpga İle Mobil Robot İçin Öğrenme Algoritması Modellenmesi. Yüksek 
lisans tezi, Yıldız Teknik Üniversitesi, İstanbul.  
Tantuğ, A. C. ve Türkmenoğlu, C. (2015). Türkçe Metinlerde Duygu Analizi. Yüksek lisans 
tezi, İstanbul Teknik Üniversitesi, İstanbul. 
Topal, Ç. (2017). Alan Turing’in Toplum bilimsel Düşünü: Toplumsal Bir Düş Olarak Yapay 
Zeka. DTCF Dergisi, 57(2), 1350-1352. 
40 
View publication stats